(compbio-bias)=
# Sources of bias in computational biology datasets

## Why we care
[//]: # (TODO: Restructure this section so that the different sources of bias are in a sensible order and that I have proof for each. Rename "why we care" and "we want to trust science")

```{epigraph}
The imposing edifice of science provides a challenging view of what can be achieved by the accumulation of many small efforts in a steady objective and dedicated search for truth.

-- Charles H. Townes
```

[//]: # (TODO: Rewrite this so that the vibe is more "hey we all agree that we want to be able to rely on science and less "FUCK ALL OF YOU")

We want to trust the results of scientific research. 
Not only when it’s our own (because it’s fun and exciting to look for and find the truth), but because scientific research is generally paid for by tax, and the results that are generated by it drive policy, drug treatments, and innovations. 

In all fields, science is a search for the truth. And in all fields, there are concerns about what makes bad, unreliable, un-useful, or biased research; what must be done or not done to uphold science’s claim to truth, or at least reliability. 
Computational biology has a number of unique characteristics which make these questions worth discussing in its specific context. 

[//]: # (TODO: REf the "earlier" below:)
As mentioned earlier, in contrast to other fields, many bioinformatics datasets have been freely available and accessible on the internet since its inception. 
Computational biology might be a good place to look for what is required to really benefit from those open datasets, what can be gained from them (and what can’t), and what the next steps in reproducibility should be, beyond making data accessible.

Secondly, the creation of these databases has birthed a lot of research that is highly reliant on a handful of large ontologies and databases, the completeness of which is unknown, and the cataloging process by which they are added to is extremely uneven. 

Thirdly, many of the new publications in this field showcase novel software and models which build on these resources, despite the fact that much of it is difficult to validate due to the lack of gold standard datasets. 

When scientific results are often based on statistics, it’s inevitable that some proportion of published scientific results will not be true. 
This isn’t a problem, as over time, researchers can double-check interesting scientific results, and the literature can be updated to reflect that. 
This is sciences self-correcting mechanism. 
If a result can be replicated in a different circumstance by a different person, it reinforces the likelihood that the result is true. 
A replication doesn’t have to reveal the exact same level of statistical significance  or effect size to be successful, but (usually, depending on definitions) just a similar result.

## The reproducibility crisis 

```{epigraph}
In science consensus is irrelevant. What is relevant is reproducible results.

-- Michael Crichton
```

[//]: # (TODO: describe self correcting mechanism assumption)

The reproducibility crisis is the realisation that worryingly large proportions of research results do not reproduce.
Replication studies have found that only 11% of cancer research findings{cite}`Begley2012-oc`, 20-25% of drug-target findings{cite}`Begley2012-oc,Prinz2011-rh`, and 39% of psychology findings{cite}`Open_Science_Collaboration2015-vi` reproduced. 
Surveys of researchers across disciplines reveal that more than 70% of scientists say they have failed to reproduce another paper’s result, and over 50% say they have failed to reproduce their own results{cite}`Baker2016-tb`. 
It seems that science’s self-correcting mechanism is not working as intended.

This shocking irreproducibility is thought to be due to a multitude of factors, including poor data management, lack of available materials/details of experiments, publication bias, poor statistical knowledge, and questionable research practices{cite}`Bishop2019-hg`. 

[//]: # (TODO: Any time I explain any of this, I better be able to say WHY it's there: Go through and check that I can)

### Null Hypothesis Significance Testing

```{epigraph}
Statistical significance is the least interesting thing about the results. You should describe the results in terms of measures of magnitude –not just, does a treatment affect people, but how much does it affect them.

-- Gene V. Glass
```

[//]: # (TODO: Check maths appears correctly and none missing)

Null Hypothesis Significance Testing (NHST) is the most popular method by which scientific hypotheses are tested and reported. This reporting usually consists mostly of a p-value, a measure of statistical significance: the likelihood that a false positive could be obtained just by chance. In other words p-values are a measure of type 1 error (false positives). The threshold for this, usually denoted by $\alpha$ is most often set to 0.05, as recommended by Fischer, however there have been many debates about whether this is the most sensible cut-off for science today. Despite the dominance of p-values as main or only reported statistic across scientific fields, they do not imply that a result is interesting (the effect might be small or the hypothesis uninteresting), or even that it’s likely to be true. Sometimes the p-value is not even reported, but only whether or not it crossed the p<0.05 threshold.

Two other useful quantities of NHST are effect size and statistical power. Effect size is the magnitude of the effect found by the statistical test. A very small effect can only be detected with a large enough sample size. Statistical power is a measure related to the type 2 error (false negatives), it is $1-\beta$ where $\beta$ is the false positive rate. A statistical power of 80% is customary, where it is calculated, in which case there is a 20% chance that a result is a false negative if the null hypothesis is accepted. A very highly powered test with a high (non-significant) p-value represents strong evidence that the null hypothesis is true, although it may often be reported as “failing to reach significance”. Low-powered tests, coinciding with low sample sizes, mean that both the acceptance or rejection of the null hypothesis is likely to be unreliable. 

[//]: # (TODO: Check math below and formatting.)
[//]: # (TODO: Add link to dance of the p-values)
P-values do not have a high prediction value for reproducibility, since they have a high spread, even when a test is reasonably highly powered. Statistician Geoff Cumming refers to this as the “dance of the p-values”. Instead, a measure of the expected truth of a finding can be estimated from the proportion of hypotheses that are true in a given field, the statistical power, the p-value threshold as:

$$
ppv=\frac{(1-\beta)p_{true}}{p_{true}(1-\beta-\alpha)+\alpha}
$$

Where $ppv$ stands for positive predictive value and $p_{true}$ is the proportion of true hypotheses in a field{cite}`Ioannidis2005-mo`. 

For this version of the formula (there is also a version that includes bias, which was instrumental in the Ionnaidis’ claim that “most published research findings are false”{cite}`Ioannidis2005-mo`), and standard choices for power and statistical significance of $\alpha=0.05$ and $\beta=0.2$, we would expect more findings to false than true if $p_{true}<0.0588$ (3.s.f). That might seem like a small number, but in some bioinformatics experiments, we hypothesise that millions of SNPs may be responsible for a trait, when only small numbers are. On the other hand, if half of researchers hypotheses were correct for a given field ($p_{true}=0.5$), the formula would yield $ppv=0.941$ (3.s.f.), but the low reproducibility of GWAS results, gene annotations, etc, implies that the proportion of true hypotheses is less than this.

The same approach can be used to calculate the limit for $p_{true}$ for which we’d expect there to be more false positives than false negatives. Using the same values for and  and , we get $p_{true}=0.2$, i.e. if less than 20% of hypotheses are true, then we are more likely to get false positives than false negatives. This is interesting as most published scientific results are claiming a positive result, so we are essentially erring on the side of publishing erroneous errors.

[//]: # (TODO: Instert image and fix reference and citations/links)

```{figure} ../images/p_hacking.png
---
height: 220px
name: p_hacking
---
Images that are illustrative of researchers approaches to p-values and p-hacking. The left image is [a popular tweet](https://twitter.com/FaustoBustos/status/1103435523777978368), while the right image is [an xkcd comic](https://xkcd.com/1478/)).
```

In addition to poor reporting and underpowered tests, the pressure on scientists to publish means that researchers may be tempted to (or may accidentally, due to statistical ignorance) employ data-mining tactics in order to harvest significant p-values. This practice is known as “p-hacking”, and evidence for its existence can be found in distributions of p-values in scientific literature{cite}`Head2015-ns`, as well as popular culture ({numref}`p_hacking`). This can include rerunning analysis with different models/covariates, collecting data until a significant p-value is reached, or performing 20 experiments and only publishing the results of one. 

```{epigraph}
The first principle is that you must not fool yourself – and you are the easiest person to fool. 
-- Richard Feynman 
```

[//]: # (TODO: Aside about how Fischer is the worst)
There are several suggested tonics to the problem of uninformative and ubiquitous p-values. Reporting p-values as numbers rather than in relation to a threshold (e.g. p<0.05) is starting point. Information about statistical power and effect size should also be provided. In addition to giving researchers reading a paper a better idea of the quality of it, this also allows science to self-correct a little easier, since individual p-values can then be combined into more reliable p-values, using for example Fischer’s method{cite}`Fisher1990-ro`. 

A more interesting solution is pre-registration, as used in clinical trials. This involves a detailed publication in advance of the analysis protocols that will be used in order to prevent tweaking analysis based on seeing the data. This solves p-hacking related problems, and makes a distinction between hypothesis-generating and hypothesis-testing research.

For cases where many hypotheses are being generated at once (for example in GWAS), multiple hypothesis corrections (e.g. the Bonferroni correction{cite}`Dunn1958-sj` or the False Discovery Rate{cite}`Benjamini1995-me`) can be employed to adjust the p-value to account for this.

### Publication bias
[//]: # (TODO: Check where else Barbaric2007-zm is cited)
Although with current standard p-value and power cut-offs, negative results are more likely to be true than positive ones, negative results are much harder to publish. This bias is likely to be responsible for the draw of questionable research practices like p-hacking. It also means that there is a lot of unpublished, negative results which are likely to be repeated, since there is no way that someone could know it has already been done. A highly powered negative result could be very interesting, for example, we know hardly anything about which genes do not appear to affect phenotypes, since these results are not published{cite}`Barbaric2007-zm`, but they would help enormously with the challenge of creating a gold standard dataset for gene function prediction.

Registered reports are an attempt to remove these problems associated with publication bias, by linking the concept of pre-registration with that of publishing. Essentially, authors submit their introduction and methods section to a journal and at this point they undergo peer review and the journal agrees to publish the results, regardless of the result. At the time of writing over 170 journals were accepting registered reports and the number has been growing in recent months, across disciplines, although they are currently most popular in psychology and neuroscience{cite}`Hardwicke_undated-jj`. This solution also offers peer-review at a more helpful stage in the manuscript, when it’s still possible to make changes to the experiment.

#### Reproducibility in bioinformatics
In a field that has long had a huge number of open data repositories, and a relatively high level of statistical knowledge among researchers, in some ways bioinformatics might be expected to be ahead of the curve in terms of reproducible research. 
It certainly seems that as a field, it excelling at open research. At the same time, however, it is even more important for the work to be reproducible if data and software are being reused by multiple researchers.

The Gene Ontology Annotations (GOA) are a combination of experimental and computational annotations. 
While the supporting publications for the experimental annotations are available, the GO consortium do not provide the statistical evidence that they used alongside this (e.g. p-value, effect size), etc. 

